We report the experimental studies of a parametric excitation of a second
sound (SS) by a first sound (FS) in a superfluid helium in a resonance cavity.
The results on several topics in this system are presented: (i) The linear
properties of the instability, namely, the threshold, its temperature and
geometrical dependencies, and the spectra of SS just above the onset were
measured. They were found to be in a good quantitative agreement with the
theory. (ii) It was shown that the mechanism of SS amplitude saturation is due
to the nonlinear attenuation of SS via three wave interactions between the SS
waves. Strong low frequency amplitude fluctuations of SS above the threshold
were observed. The spectra of these fluctuations had a universal shape with
exponentially decaying tails. Furthermore, the spectral width grew continuously
with the FS amplitude. The role of three and four wave interactions are
discussed with respect to the nonlinear SS behavior. The first evidence of
Gaussian statistics of the wave amplitudes for the parametrically generated
wave ensemble was obtained. (iii) The experiments on simultaneous pumping of
the FS and independent SS waves revealed new effects. Below the instability
threshold, the SS phase conjugation as a result of three-wave interactions
between the FS and SS waves was observed. Above the threshold two new effects
were found: a giant amplification of the SS wave intensity and strong resonance
oscillations of the SS wave amplitude as a function of the FS amplitude.
Qualitative explanations of these effects are suggested.