Microorganisms such as bacteria and fungi play essential roles in many
application fields, like biotechnique, medical technique and industrial domain.
Microorganism counting techniques are crucial in microorganism analysis,
helping biologists and related researchers quantitatively analyze the
microorganisms and calculate their characteristics, such as biomass
concentration and biological activity. However, traditional microorganism
manual counting methods, such as plate counting method, hemocytometry and
turbidimetry, are time-consuming, subjective and need complex operations, which
are difficult to be applied in large-scale applications. In order to improve
this situation, image analysis is applied for microorganism counting since the
1980s, which consists of digital image processing, image segmentation, image
classification and suchlike. Image analysis-based microorganism counting
methods are efficient comparing with traditional plate counting methods. In
this article, we have studied the development of microorganism counting methods
using digital image analysis. Firstly, the microorganisms are grouped as
bacteria and other microorganisms. Then, the related articles are summarized
based on image segmentation methods. Each part of the article is reviewed by
methodologies. Moreover, commonly used image processing methods for
microorganism counting are summarized and analyzed to find common technological
points. More than 144 papers are outlined in this article. In conclusion, this
paper provides new ideas for the future development trend of microorganism
counting, and provides systematic suggestions for implementing integrated
microorganism counting systems in the future. Researchers in other fields can
refer to the techniques analyzed in this paper.