Citrus diseases pose threats to citrus farming and result in economic losses
worldwide. Nucleic acid and serology-based methods of detection and,
immunochromatographic assays are commonly used but these laboratory tests are
laborious, expensive and might be subjected to cross-reaction and
contamination. Modern optical spectroscopic techniques offer a promising
alternative as they are label-free, sensitive, rapid, non-destructive, and
demonstrate the potential for incorporation into an autonomous system for
disease detection in citrus orchards. Nevertheless, the majority of optical
spectroscopic methods for citrus disease detection are still in the trial
phases and, require additional efforts to be established as efficient and
commercially viable methods. The review presents an overview of fundamental
working principles, the state of the art, and explains the applications and
limitations of the optical spectroscopy technique including the spectroscopic
imaging approach (hyperspectral imaging) in the identification of diseases in
citrus plants. The review highlights (1) the technical specifications of
optical spectroscopic tools that can potentially be utilized in field
measurements, (2) their applications in screening citrus diseases through leaf
spectroscopy, and (3) discusses their benefits and limitations, including
future insights into label-free identification of citrus diseases. Moreover,
the role of artificial intelligence is reviewed as potential effective tools
for spectral analysis, enabling more accurate detection of infected citrus
leaves even before the appearance of visual symptoms by leveraging
compositional, morphological, and chemometric characteristics of the plant
leaves. The review aims to encourage stakeholders to enhance the development
and commercialization of field-based, label-free optical tools for the rapid
and early-stage screening of citrus diseases in plants.